major rewrite of bin with lots of added examples (#400)
KxSystems/docs: docs/ref/bin.md

x binr y    binr[x;y]
```

## Lists

Where

-   `x` is a sorted list
-   `y` is an atom or list of exactly the same type (no type promotion)

> returns the index of the _last_ item in `x` which is ≤`y`. The result is `-1` for `y` less than the first item of `x`. If `y` is a list, the previous is repeated for each item of `y`.

Reviewer: "the previous" sounds like it lacks something after it. We should instead say that the operation is atomic in `y`, which means it can be a list, dictionary or a combination of those and the operation will extend accordingly.

Author: Atomic, though is a narrower term in q than what we want to mean here. That said, this is also wrong as it is right now. Should we just point to what's currently there in the documentation for Find, as what happens with different ranks is explained there in more detail?

Reviewer: It would be OK to link to it and say that the expansion works the same way.

`binr` _binary search right_, introduced in V3.0 2012.07.26, gives the index of the _first_ item in `x` which is ≥`y`.

```q
q)0 2 4 6 8 10 bin 5
2
q)0 2 4 6 8 10 bin -10 0 4 5 6 20
-1 0 2 2 3 5

q)0 1 1 2 bin 0 1 2
0 2 3
q)0 1 1 2 binr 0 1 2
0 1 3
```

> `bin` uses a binary-search algorithm, which is generally more efficient on large data than the linear-search algorithm used by `?` ([Find](find.md)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`bin` uses a binary search algorithm, which is generally more efficient on large data than the linear-search algorithm used by `?` ([Find](find.md)).
```

> `bin` uses a binary-search algorithm, which is generally more efficient on large data than the linear-search algorithm used by `?` ([Find](find.md)).

Reviewer: Should the `?` be part of the link?

Author: Yes.

The items of `x` must be sorted ascending although `bin` does not verify this property.

!!! danger "If `x` is not sorted the result is undefined."

> `bin` can be also used if `x` is a dictionary with its values sorted. In this case, instead of indexes, the respective keys are returned. If a value is not found, the null value of the key type is returned.

Reviewer: Technically, the keys of the dictionary are its indexes, so it's not different in the two cases, only the "not found" case is.

Author: And technically, not even then, as indexing the keys with -1 gives the same result. Remove the second part?

```q
q)(`a`b`c!0 2 4) bin -1 3
``b
```

Non-simple lists can also be used. In this case, items are lexicographically sorted.

```q

> q)("apple";"banana";"coffee") bin ("anise";"berry";"curry")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
q)("bond";"equity";"futures") bin ("commodities";"derivatives";"equities")
```

Author: Hi, sorry for not getting back to you earlier. One of the reasons those exact examples are given is because quite a few of the first letters are the same, therefore showcasing the fact that this is a lexicographic ordering more easily. (The exact suggested change also isn't good because it won't give the result in the next line, but that can be solved.) If you really insist on the assets, I'll reorder these so that the result is correct. Shall we go with that?

Reviewer 2: Hi @rpinterKX ! Ok, i see now what you mean. Was thinking that would be nice to have some words remotely related to finance, but don't worry too much about it. I'll leave it to you. Thank you & happy Friday

r[j]=x bin y[j]    for all j in index of y
```

`bin` is the function used in [`aj`](aj.md) and [`lj`](lj.md).

`bin` and `binr` are [multithreaded primitives](../kb/mt-primitives.md).

## Tables

Where

-   `x` is a table of `n` columns

> -   `y` is a table row with the same schema (i.e. a dictionary)

Reviewer: It doesn't have to be a dictionary, it can be a list.

Author: It can, but that opens a can of worms. How would you introduce this concept efficiently?

Reviewer: I would say "(e.g. a list with the same length or a dictionary)". That leaves the possibility open that there might be other types that work.

returns the index of the last row of `x` for which 

- the first `n-1` values each match the first `n-1` values of `y`, and
- the last value is not greater than the last value of `y`.

> If `y` is a table with the same schema as `x`, this is repeated for each row of it.

Reviewer: Again this follows from the atomic property. "this is repeated for each row of it" looks like awkward wording.

If no items match the criteria, either because there are no rows that match in the first `n-1` columns, or because the last value is smaller than the last value in the first such row, `0N` is returned.

```q
q)t:([]a:`p`p`p`q`q`q;b:0 2 4 0 2 4)
q)t bin `a`b!(`p;3)
1
q)t bin ([]a:`q;b:-1 1 3 5)
0N 3 4 5
q)t bin `a`b!(`r;2)
0N
```

To use `bin` with a table, the last column needs not be sorted overall, but it needs to be sorted within the equivalence classes defined by the first `n-1` columns (as shown in the previous example).

> `bin` can also be used with keyed tables. Here, `y` needs to contain all value columns, and it's the keys that are going to be returned (as a table).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`bin` can also be used with keyed tables. Here, `y` needs to contain all value columns, and it is the keys that are returned (as a table).
```
